
=== PAGE 1 ===
 
 
                                                                                                             2013 
 
9 
Bengali (25 marks) 
Bengali (or Bangla, written বাাংলা) is the official language of Bangladesh (literally 
"land of Bangla") and West Bengal, India, and is spoken by 230 million people. Here 
are some Bengali sentences (as spoken in Bangladesh) and their English translations: 
 
1. Ami meyeţir alindaţar nice thekechi.  
 
 
 I've stayed under the balcony of the girl. 
2. Kоbiţi gоruţir kôtha lekhe.  
 
 
 The poet is writing about the cow 
3. Tumi jhoŗaţa kôro.  
 
 
 You are making the basket. 
4. Khiţi boŗolokţir gaŗiţa dekheche.  
 
 
 The maid has seen the car of the rich 
man. 
5. Tumi baŗiţa theke khiţir śathe aso.  
 
 
 You are coming from the house 
together with the maid.  
6. Kukurţi khêlnaţa ghôrţar modhye ane.  
 
 
 The dog is bringing the toy into the 
room.  
7. Ami mondirţa theke gaŗiţa kore ghuri.  
 
 
 I'm traveling from the temple by car.  
8. Se dinţа dhore ghurеche.  
 
 
 He has traveled during the day. 
9. Ami khêlnaţa cheleţir śathe kori.  
 
 
 I'm making the toy together with the 
boy. 
10. Коbiţi kukurţike baŗiţar baire dêkhe. 
 
 
 The poet is seeing the dog outside the 
house. 
11. Guruţi boŗolokţir môto nace.  
 
 
 The teacher is dancing like the rich 
man. 
12 Kobiţir dinţа eseche.  
 
 
 The day of the poet has come.  
13.Ami cheleţike baŗiţar kache dhorechi.  
 
 
 I've held the girl near the house. 
14 Meyeţi deśţar kôtha pôŗe.  
 
The girl is reading about the land. 
 

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
 
                                                                                                             2013 
 
Note: ê and ô are wider versions of e and o. ś sounds like sh in shoe. ţ and ŗ are 
specific consonants. h after a consonant denotes aspiration. 
 
Questions 
9.1. If jadukôr is “wizard", and skul is “school", translate: 
 
a. Guruţir cheleţi khiţir śathe ghore. 
b. Tumi guruţir môto likhecho. 
c. Jadukôrţi  jhoŗaţa ghôrţa theke eneche.  
d. Se skulţar kache thake. 
 
9.2. If “cat” is biŗal, translate into Bengali: 
 
e. I'm seeing the house of the poet near the school. 
f. You've traveled from the house of the rich man. 
g. The teacher is holding the cat outside the car. 
 
9.3. If ‘towards’ is dike, and ‘after’ is pôre, you should be able to translate one of the 
following sentences into Bengali, but a crucial gap in your information prevents you 
from translating the other. Decide which sentence you can translate with certainty, 
and translate it; and show why you can’t be sure how to translate the other.  
 
h. You travel towards the teacher. 
i. He's coming after the maid of the wizard. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 3 ===
 
 
                                                                                                             2013 
 
9 
Bengali [25 marks] 
27 points:  
• 9.1: 3 points per sentence fully correct. 
o 2 points for: 
▪ all lexical words correct and a single error in grammatical 
relations,  
▪ or vice versa – all grammatical relations correct but a single 
wrong lexical word 
o 1 point for just two errors. 
o Try not to penalise the same error more than once. 
o Accept: 
▪ simple present (e.g. stays) for present progressive (is staying) 
▪ simple past (e.g. wrote) or past progressive (e.g. were writing) 
for present perfect (have written) – but not for present 
progressive (are writing) 
▪ the teacher’s boy, travels with 
▪ near synonyms, e.g. ‘live’ for ‘stay’, ‘son’ for ‘boy’, ‘take’ for 
‘bring’ 
▪ ‘girl’ or ‘child’ for ‘boy’ – there’s an error in the data at #13. 
▪ ‘the’ for ‘a’ or nothing, and vice versa;  
• 9.2: 3 points per sentence fully correct. 
o 2 points for: 
▪ all lexical words correct and a single error in inflection or word 
order or spelling. 
▪ or vice versa – a single wrong lexical word, but correct 
inflections and word order. 
o 1 point for just two errors. 
o Require correct order for kobiṭir baṛiṭa,  
o Require correct diacritics, e.g. ṭ not t; but don’t penalise for their 
omission in more than one word across all sentences. 
o If it’s really illegible, mark it wrong.  
• 9.3: 6 points: 
o 3 points for correct translation of sentence (i) (as in 9.2 above) 
o 3 points for explanation for why (h) can’t be translated. 
▪ 1 point for ‘travel’ can’t be translated because all examples are 
present progressive (another error in the data!). 
▪ See the full explanation of the grammatical background below 
the solutions. 
 
9.1. a.  The boy of the teacher is traveling together with the maid. 
b. You have written like the teacher. 
c. The wizard has brought the basket from the room. 
d. He is staying near the school. 
9.2. e.  Ami kobiṭir baṛiṭa skulṭar kache dekhi. 
f.  Tumi boṛolokṭir baṛiṭa theke ghurecho. 
g.  Guruṭi biṛalṭike gaṛiṭar baire dhore. 
9.3. h. Tumi guruṭi/guruṭir dike ghoro. – untranslatable because of uncertainty 
about the form of guruṭi/guruṭir. 
i. Se jadukôrṭir khiṭir pôre ase.  

=== PAGE 4 ===
 
 
                                                                                                             2013 
 
Background grammar for Bengali 
[provided by the problem’s author, Bozhidar Bozhanov] 
 
Bengali sentences have the following structure 
 
<subject> <direct object> <indirect object> <verb>  
 
All animate nouns end in -ti, and all inanimate nouns end in -ṭa (a definite article, in a 
way) 
Animate direct objects also get -ke after the article. Possessors come before the 
possessed and end in -r. The same ending is present on nouns that are followed by: 
nice ‘under’, kôtha ‘about’, śathe ‘together with’, modhye ‘in’, baire ‘outside', 
môto ‘like’, kache ‘near’. The ending is not added before theke ‘from’, kore ‘with’, 
dhore ‘during’. 
Verbs have the -ech suffix in the past tense, and end in -i, -o or -e for 1st, 2nd and 3rd 
person respectively. In addition to that, there is a vowel change in the root: 
in pres.tense, 1st person, and in past tense (all persons) it is a narrow one, and 
in present tense, 2nd and 3rd person it is wide (i~e, e~ê and e~a; u~o, o~ô). 
 
For question 9.3:  
 
The 2nd group mentioned before, consisting of three special postpositions (theke, 
kore, dhore), requires the noun before them to be in the same form as the subject 
(nominative), and the rest of the postpositions require it to be in possessive form. 
 
What separates these postpositions from the rest is the fact that they resemble verbs 
(stay, make, hold) with a 3rd person ending, but with a narrow vowel. 
?Tumi mondirṭa/mondirṭar dike ghoro. 
Se jadukôrṭir khiṭir pôre ase. 
If translating one of the sentences is easy, then it is certain that one of the 
postpositions is not from the 2nd group. dike (assuming root "dik~dek) could be from 
the 2nd group (though it is not, in fact). We can say that in the vowel system of 
Bengali the sound ô doesn't have a wider counterpart and then pôre can only be a 
member of the first group of postpositions (requiring possessive).  
 
 
 
