
=== PAGE 1 ===
Your name:                                                                                                                                             
The UK Linguistics Olympiad   2017                          
 
Problem 9. The Goat, the Mother and the Wardrobe (25 marks) 
Abkhaz is a Caucasian language predominantly spoken by around 100,000 people in the 
disputed territory of Abkhazia, and by a few thousand people in Turkey, Georgia, Syria, 
Russia, and Jordan. Among other things, it is known for having an extraordinary number of 
consonants (58 in the literary dialect). Here are some Abkhaz sentences in simplified 
transcription and their English translations. (hʷ, ʃʷ, p’, chᵂ, kʷ, ʃ,k’ʷ, ʒʷ, k’, c’, tɕʼ, x and ʁ 
are consonants, and ә is a vowel.) 
The god is wearing the apron. 
Anchᵂa apәrahʷa  aʃʷup’. 
The mothers are wearing the trousers. 
Anchᵂa ajkʷa  rәʃop’. 
The squirrel is wearing the hat. 
Aeʃ axәlpa aʃʷup’. 
You (sg) are wearing the hat. 
Axәlpa  bʃʷup’. 
You (pl) are wearing the felt boots. 
Ajmsәkᵂa  ʃʷәʃop’. 
The mother is wearing the cherkeska1. 
An  ak’ʷәmʒʷә  lʃʷup’. 
We are wearing the shoes. 
Ajmaakᵂa  haʃop’. 
I am wearing the shawl. 
Ak’asә  sʃʷup’. 
The old men are wearing the coats. 
Atahᵂmadachᵂa  ac’atɕ'kᵂa  rʃʷup’.
The sons are wearing the cherkeskas. 
Abachᵂa  ak’ʷәmʒʷәkᵂa  rʃʷup’. 
The girl is wearing the felt boots. 
Adzʁab  ajmsәkᵂa  lәʃop’. 
The billy-goat is wearing the trousers. 
Ab  ajkʷa  aʃop’. 
The old man is wearing the apron. 
Atahᵂmada  apәrahʷa  iʃʷup’. 
The billy-goats are wearing the cherkeskas. Abkᵂa  ak’ʷәmʒʷәkᵂa  rʃʷup’. 
The squirrels are wearing the shawls. 
Aeʃkᵂa  ak’asәkᵂa  rʃʷup’. 
 
Q.9. On your answer sheet, translate the following into English or Abkhaz: 
1. Adzʁabchᵂa  ajmaakᵂa  rәʃop’.  
2. Aba ajkʷa  iʃop’.  
3. Ak’asәkᵂa  ʃʷʃʷup’. 
4. You (sg) are wearing the cherkeska. 
5. The nanny-goat is wearing the shawl.  
6. The gods are wearing the felt boots.  
 
                                                             
1 The cherkeska is an item of traditional Caucasian clothing, a single-breasted collarless coat. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
Your name:                                                                                                                                             
The UK Linguistics Olympiad   2017                          
 
Answer sheet for Problem 9. Abkhaz 
 
9.1 
 
4 
2 
 
5 
3 
 
6 
 
 

=== PAGE 3 ===
Your name:                                                                                                                                             
The UK Linguistics Olympiad   2017                          
 
Solution and marking. 
Scoring (max 18) 
 
1-3: 2 points for each correct sentence. (max 6) 
o 1 for only one mistake. 
o ignore trivial variation (e.g. ‘plural’). 
 
4-6: 2 points for each correct underlined word, 1 for each other word. (max 4 x 2 + 4 = 12) 
o 1 for an underlined word with more than half the target word correct. 
o ignore minor copying errors e.g. p ~ p’ or ә ~ a ~e. 
o insist on the correct order of words. 
 
Score positively – give credit for each target Abkhaz word, ignore extra non-target words. 
o But in Abkhaz insist on correct affixes and order;  
 
if A … B should be B … A, accept A but not B. 
o Insist on correct number (singular/plural) and tense/aspect in English. 
o Accept an English noun only if its grammatical function is right. 
o Reject active-passive exchanges even if the meaning is the same. 
o But accept minor copying errors in Abkhaz. 
 
Score generously – if different scores are possible, choose the highest. 
 
1. The girls are wearing (the) shoes. 
2 
4. Ak’ʷәmʒʷә   bʃʷup’. 
3 
2. The son is wearing (the) trousers. 
2 
5. Ab   ak’asә   lʃʷup’. 
4 
3. You (pl) are wearing (the) shawls. 
2 
6. Anchᵂakᵂa   ajmsәkᵂa   rәʃop’. 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 4 ===
Your name:                                                                                                                                             
The UK Linguistics Olympiad   2017                          
 
Commentary 
The grammar here is simplified from real Abkhaz grammar.  
 Sentences have the word order SOV, where the subject may be omitted if the agent 
is indicated by the personal endings.  
 Nouns are sorted according to human/non-human, where human nouns take the 
plural suffix -chᵂa, while non-human nouns take -kᵂa, and human and non-human 
subjects take different verb forms.  
 Verbs are of the form: subject marker + verb root, where the subject marker varies 
for person and gender. The subject markers found in the data are as follows: 
person, gender 
singular 
plural 
1 
s 
ha 
2  
bә 
ʃʷә 
3 masc 
i 
r 
3 fem 
l 
rә 
3 non-human 
a 
r 
 
The problem presents three main challenges: 
Challenge 1: Unlike the English translation, the Abkhaz contains two different verb roots for 
‘wear’, according to where on the body the clothing is worn: ­ʃʷup’ is used for clothing worn 
on the upper half of the body, and ʃop’ for the lower half. Candidates have to notice this 
semantic difference, to know which root to use in their Abkhaz sentences in 1.2. 
Challenge 2: The singular word for ‘god’, anchᵂa, coincidentally looks like a plural (identical, 
in fact, to the plural ‘mothers’). The third part of 1.2 requires the candidate to realize this 
and add a real plural ending onto ‘god’, to form the plural anchᵂakᵂa‘gods’. The verb prefix 
a- in the first example shows that Gods are non-human (perhaps counterintuitively, given 
people’s often anthropomorphic idea of gods), so they take ­kᵂa. 
Challenge 3: No word for ‘nanny­goat’ is given, and so candidates should take the step of 
using the word for ‘billy­goat’ with feminine endings on the verb (which requires noticing 
that the verb varies according to the gender of the subject). 
