
=== PAGE 1 ===
 
UKLO Round 1 2012 
8. Arcturan intergalactic peace message (20 marks) 
It is the year 2354 AD, and we are trying to make contact with two alien species, the 
Centauri and the Arcturans. Although we have never met either species, we have seen 
their communication for a very long time. Our scientists first received messages from 
the Centauri. These aliens from Alpha Centauri live in the solar system closest to 
earth. Their first message was a message of peace: “farok crrrok hihok yorok clok 
kantok ok-yurp”.  
 
Now, we know that the Centauri have been in contact for some time with the 
Arcturans, who live in another solar system. We have never had contact with the 
Arcturans, but newly developed technology makes it possible for us to send them a 
message. We would like to send them, first, a message of peace. Because we do not 
understand their language, this is not an easy task. However, we do know that the 
Centauri have been in contact with them for a while and we have intercepted 
messages which they have sent. These messages include both languages, and are 
shown in the table below. Here we find 12 sentences in Centauri and their translations 
in Arcturan. Unfortunately, because we have just been eavesdropping their meaning is 
unknown, but we do know that the sentences pairs are translations of each other.  
 
CEN 1 ok-voon ororok sprok.  
ARC 1 at-voon bichat dat. 
CEN 2 ok-drubel ok-voon anok plok 
sprok.  
ARC 2 at-drubel at-voon pippat rrat dat. 
CEN 3 erok sprok izok hihok ghirok.  
ARC 3 totat dat arrat vat hilat. 
CEN 4 ok-voon anok drok brok jok.  
ARC 4 at-voon krat pippat sat lat. 
CEN 5 wiwok farok izok stok.  
ARC 5 totat jjat quat cat. 
CEN 6 lalok sprok izok jok stok. 
 ARC 6 wat dat krat quat cat. 
CEN 7 lalok farok ororok lalok sprok 
izok enemok.  
ARC 7 wat jjat bichat wat dat vat eneat. 
CEN 8 lalok brok anok plok nok.  
ARC 8 iat lat pippat rrat nnat. 
CEN 9 wiwok nok izok kantok ok-yurp.  ARC 9 totat nnat quat sloat at-yurp. 
CEN 10 lalok mok nok yorok ghriok 
clok.  
ARC 10 wat nnat gat mat bat hilat. 
CEN 11 lalok nok crrrok hihok yorok 
zanzanok.  
ARC 11 wat nnat arrat mat zanzanat. 
CEN 12 lalok rarok nok izok hihok mok.  ARC 12 wat nnat forat arrat vat gat. 
 
We want to use this information to translate the original peace message from the 
Centauri so we can send this to the Arcturans. After some years a reply message in 
Arcturan is received. It reads: 'totat nnat forat arrat mat bat.' Since it’s likely that we 
on earth will understand Centauri before Arcturan because of the closeness of its solar 
system, we would like to translate this sentence to Centauri.  
 

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
Question 8. (Write your answers on the separate answer sheet.) 
1. Translate the Centauri message (repeated below) into Arcturan. 
CEN: farok crrrok hihok yorok clok kantok ok-yurp. 
 
2. Translate the Arcturan reply (repeated below) into Centauri. 
ARC: totat nnat forat arrat mat bat. 
 
8. Arcturan (20 marks) 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 3 ===
 
SOLUTION 
How to mark an UKLO script 
Terminology 
• target: the correct answer; e.g. ‘A B C d’ (where X, Y and Z are wrong) 
• script answer: the answer in the script you’re marking; e.g. ‘A X C D’. 
• point: a number that you assign, which the spreadsheet eventually translates 
into a ‘mark’; e.g. 1 for A 
• unit: a part of the target that carries a point; e.g. A, X and C. Typically a unit 
is a word, a phrase or a word-part. 
• sign: a ‘mark’ that you make on each unit in the script. 
o tick: on a completely right unit; e.g. on A and C 
o cross: on a completely wrong unit; e.g. on X 
o half: on a partly right unit; e.g. on D (for d) 
 
Example: 
 
 
 
½  
A 
X 
C 
d 
 
• score: the number you assign to the entire script, following the directions in 
the marking scheme. 
Principles 
• Each correct unit or partly right unit in the script answer increases the score. 
• Completely wrong units in the script answer are penalised simply by not 
increasing the score. 
o e.g. A X C d scores 3 because X scores 0.  
• Similarly, units in the target that are missing from the script answer are 
penalised simply by not increasing the score. 
o e.g. A C d scores 3 because only A, C and d score anything. 
• But if the script answer contains more units than the target, the surplus units 
should be penalised.  
o e.g. A B C d X scores 3 because X scores -1, though A B C d score 4. 
• No score should be worse than a completely blank answer, so there are no 
negative scores. 
o e.g. A B C d X Y Z Z Z scores 0, because althought each X, Y and Z 
reduces the score by 1, the effect stops when the score reaches 0.  
How to score 
1. Follow the marking sheet for  
a. recognising units 
b. assigning ticks and halves 
c. assigning points for ticks and halves. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
 
2. Count the units in the script answer and compare this number with the number 
of units in the target. If the script answer contains more units than the target, 
go to 4. Otherwise (i.e. in the vast majority of cases) go to 3. 
3. Add up all the points for ticks and halves. That’s the score. 
4. As in 3, but then deduct the number of surplus units, i.e. the difference 
between the numbers of units in the script answer and in the target. 
 
8. Arcturan (20 marks, 10 points) 
 
NB There were serious errors in the data on the original question paper, but these 
have been corrected in the present version.  
 
• Units: single words 
• Points per unit: 5/6 (!!! Sorry ..... Calculate the total with 1 per unit, then x 5/6 and 
round up or down to the nearest .5). 
• Accept:  
o any order of words. 
o #2 with or without crrrok. 
o erok for wiwok and mok for clok (but not both erok and wiwok or mok and 
clok). 
 
1 
jjat arrat bat mat sloat at-yurp  
 
5 
2 
wiwok/erok rarok nok (crrrok) hihok yorok clok/mok (the 6 target 
words + crrrok) 
 
